 
Chapter 1

Introduction
This Tutorial is intended to give an insight into mathematical programming, and Operations Research in general, through the development of Linear Programming (LP) and Mixed-Integer Linear
Programming (MILP) models using the GNU MathProg (GMPL) modeling language.
Optimization means finding the most suitable solution in real life situations. This is often possible using common sense or some simple logic, but there are many cases where advanced approaches
are needed. Usually a mathematical model of the problem is considered, and solution methods are
designed utilizing the best of the available mathematical theoretical background, computer theory
and existing technology.
The problem is generally the vast number of possible solutions to a problem, which are impossible
to be all taken into account one by one, even with the fastest computers available. In many situations,
instead of a perfect solution, „rules of thumb”, also called heuristic methods are used. These simplify
the underlying model of the problem, trim the set of possible solutions to be investigated or both.
This sacrifices optimality but makes finding a fairly good solution of the problem computationally
possible. Nevertheless, even in these cases, finding such a solution usually requires some optimization
to be made, for example to find the best solution from a few candidates.
If an optimization problem is faced, a „conventional” method of solving is the design, implementation and application of a specific algorithm, which usually require some programming language.
The concept of algorithm has a very general meaning, and it also depends on what programming
language we choose to implement it, but usually the data structures used and the steps to be made
are described. This is what most common programming languages can do, for example C/C++,
Java, Python, etc. The common point in these languages is that not only the „What?” is answered
by implementing the algorithm, but the „How?” is also addressed by the programmer. That is, the
exact steps to be made with the data are described. For example, Dijkstra’s algorithm can find the
shortest path in a graph, Kruskal’s algorithm can find the cheapest spanning tree of a graph, or the
Ford-Fulkerson algorithm is capable of finding the optimal flow in a flow network.
Mathematical programming methods are an alternative. Instead of describing the steps to
be made, only the mathematical model of the real-world problem is formulated. The mathematical
model consists of statements like equations, inequalities, logical expressions and more, which correspond to the rules governing the real-world problem and its solution. Then, the real-world problem
is solved by finding solutions to the system of these equations, inequalities or other statements.
However, only the formulation of the mathematical model is up to the programmer, not the algorithm of how it is solved. The latter is actually done by some solver software, which is designed to
solve a particular class of mathematical programming models.
In this Tutorial, a subset of mathematical programming methods, namely Linear Programming (LP) and Mixed-Integer Linear Programming (MILP) models are in scope, which can
be formulated by the GNU MathProg (GMPL) modeling language [1]. Tackling real-world opti3

INTRODUCTION

mization problems by formulating a mathematical programming model and solving it with a solver
software is a valuable expertise that is substantially different from programming in the „conventional” way. Nevertheless, an algorithm designed to solve a specific optimization problem may be
much faster than a mathematical programming model: many well-studied optimization problems
have state-of-the-art algorithmic solutions. However, for some problems, even for some where decent
algorithms exist, designing a mathematical programming model instead can be surprisingly fast and
easy. Mathematical programming models are also more flexible in case the real-world problem itself
is changed.
The algorithms that the solvers utilize to actually solve our formulated mathematical programming model are on their own an interesting subject, but is not in focus. In short, the way these
models can be formulated are more important than how these mathematical models can be solved
to optimality.
The modeling language GNU MathProg is selected because, along with its solver glpsol in the
GNU Linear Programming Kit [2], these are tools relatively easy to be understood, and available
under the GNU General Public License. There are many other free, and commercial tools for both
formulating and solving not only MILP, but more general mathematical programming models. Many
of such tools are much faster than glpsol.
There are several other learning materials available in this subject. The basic installation of
GLPK also includes a bunch of example models, including complex ones. GLPK also has a Wikibooks project where usage is covered in high detail [3]. We would like to recommend the Linear
Programming tutorial of Hegyháti [4]. Moreover, many useful books and lecture materials can be
found at the Hungarian Tankönyvtár homepage [5].
This Tutorial presents the basics of the language, and some key problems that can be easily
solved by mathematical programming tools, to give an insight into the strength of optimization with
mathematical, and particularly MILP models. Some algorithmic solution methods for particular
problems are also presented.
The rest of the Tutorial is organized as follows.
• Chapter 2 provides the introduction to the main goals, tools and concepts of optimization.
• Chapter 3 introduces to the basic usage of GNU MathProg and solver glpsol. A minimal,
„Hello, World!” model file is shown.
• In Chapter 4, linear equation systems are solved using GNU MathProg with gradually improving model implementations. This part aims at demonstrating features of the language that
are required to develop concise and general LP/MILP models, most importantly indexing and
the separation of model and data sections.
• Chapter 5 introduces the production problem, a simple optimization problem. Incremental
development of models is in focus, demonstrated through changes, extensions of the problem
definition. Some additional language features, and integer variables are used.
• Chapter 6 shows another simple optimization problem, the transportation problem. Modeling
techniques for some cost functions are presented, which can be part of more complex problems.
• Chapter 7 mentions some harder problems requiring MILP model formulations. Advanced
modeling and coding techniques, and possible graphical outputs are presented.
• Chapter 8 gives an insight into the LP/MILP solving algorithms, explaining briefly how software tools may work in the background.
This Tutorial contains attachments. All GNU MathProg codes including model and data
files, and its outputs mentioned in the text can be found, grouped by chapters and sections. (A
more detailed description is available in the attachment itself.)
4

INTRODUCTION

For learning purposes, it is recommended to manually see, and solve the models with their
corresponding data file(s) to investigate the results. Note that most of the codes and more important
output file segments are included in the text of the Tutorial itself, full or in part, using a specific
format.
GNU MathProg code of model files is formatted like this.

GNU MathProg code of data sections that may go to
separate data files are formatted like this.

Output generated by the solver is formatted like this.

Commands to be run are formatted like this.
If you have questions, or in case you find any errors in this Tutorial, please feel free to contact
us at eles@dcs.uni-pannon.hu. We hope you will find this material useful.

5
