

## Chapter 6

### Transportation Problem 🚚

We'll introduce another common **optimization problem**, known as the **transportation problem**.

Given a set of **supply points** with a known amount of available resources and a set of **demand points** with a known resource requirement, the objective is to organize the transportation of the resource between these supplies and demands.

It's worth noting that this problem has very fast algorithmic solution techniques [15]. However, we're primarily focused on the **modeling techniques**. As we'll see, an LP (Linear Programming) or MILP (Mixed-Integer Linear Programming) formulation can be easily adjusted if the problem definition changes. This can be significantly harder to do with specific solution algorithms.

This chapter also presents some additional capabilities of **GNU MathProg**. The goal is to demonstrate how to handle different cost functions while keeping the model within the class of LP and sometimes MILP models. Finally, we'll add an extra layer of transportation to the problem to show how separately modeled parts of a system can be incorporated into a single, cohesive model.

-----

### 6.1 Basic Transportation Problem

The basic transportation problem can be described generally as follows:

**Problem 21.**

Given a **single material**, a set of **supply points**, and a set of **demand points**. Each supply point has a nonnegative **availability**, and each demand point has a nonnegative **requirement** for the material. The material can be transported from any supply point to any demand point, in any amount. The **unit cost** for transportation is known for each specific pair. The task is to find the transportation amounts such that the following conditions are met:

  * **Available amounts** at supply points are not exceeded.
  * **Required amounts** at demand nodes are satisfied.
  * The **total transportation cost** is minimal.

For simplicity, we'll simply call the supply points and demand points **supplies** and **demands**. Note that the term "material" can be replaced by any other resource, such as electricity, water, funds, or manpower.

The network connecting the supplies and demands can be represented by a **directed graph** (see Figure 1), where the nodes are the supplies and demands, and the arcs represent the connections between them. The direction of an arc shows the direction of material flow, which always goes from a supply to a demand.

**Figure 1:** Graph representing the original transportation problem.

Similar to the production problem, we'll provide an example for the transportation problem. The following data will be used throughout this chapter.

**Problem 22.**

There are four supplies, labeled **S1** through **S4**, and six demands, labeled **D1** through **D6**. The amount of materials available at each supply, required at each demand, and the unit transportation costs between each supply-demand pair are summarized in the following table.

| | **D1** | **D2** | **D3** | **D4** | **D5** | **D6** | **Available** |
|:---|:---:|:---:|:---:|:---:|:---:|:---:|:---:|
| **S1** | 5 | 10 | 3 | 9 | 5 | 12 | 100 |
| **S2** | 1 | 2 | 6 | 1 | 2 | 6 | 250 |
| **S3** | 6 | 5 | 1 | 6 | 4 | 8 | 190 |
| **S4** | 9 | 10 | 6 | 8 | 9 | 7 | 210 |
| **Required** | 120 | 140 | 170 | 90 | 110 | 120 | |

(The numbers in the last row and column refer to material amounts; all other numbers refer to the cost per unit of material transported.)

The goal is to transport materials from the supplies to the demands to satisfy requirements at the **minimal cost**.

As discussed in Section 5.6, the first step in mathematical programming is to determine the appropriate **decision variables**. However, in GNU MathProg, we can start by implementing the parameters and sets for the problem data.

In this problem, there are two sets of arbitrary size: the set of **supplies** and the set of **demands**. There are three kinds of numeric parameters that define the transportation problem:

  * The **availability**, provided for each supply.
  * The **requirement**, provided for each demand.
  * The **unit transportation cost**, provided for each supply-demand pair.

Therefore, the implementation can be written as follows. Note that all parameters are specified as nonnegative to prevent incorrect data from being supplied. The names of the sets and parameters are self-explanatory.

```glp
set Supplies;
set Demands;
param Available {s in Supplies}, >=0;
param Required {d in Demands}, >=0;
param Cost {s in Supplies, D in Demands}, >=0;
```

The decisions to be made in a transportation problem are the **exact transportation amounts**. This amount must be determined for each supply-demand pair, and these decisions are independent. For example, the problem above has 4 supplies and 6 demands, meaning 24 individual decisions must be made about the amounts transported between them. Each of these decisions corresponds to a single variable in the model. Using indexing, this can be expressed in a single `var` statement. The variable name is `tran`.

```glp
var tran {s in Supplies, D in Demands}, >=0;
```

Transportation amounts must be **nonnegative**. A negative amount would model a backward transportation (i.e., from a demand to a supply). While this might be valid in some practical applications, it is explicitly prohibited here.

We can see that the transportation amounts fully describe the situation. Based on these amounts, we can easily calculate the total activity at each supply and demand node, check whether the availability and required amounts are violated, and calculate the total costs. Therefore, no additional decision variables are needed.

Now, we formulate the constraints for the model. Not all possible nonnegative real values for the transportation amounts will result in a feasible solution in reality, because there are two restrictions we must account for.

First, the total amount transported **from** a supply **cannot exceed** the availability at that supply. This is a constraint for each supply. Note that the summation is over all demands, as material can be transported to all demands from a specific supply.

```glp
s.t. Availability_at_Supply_Points {s in Supplies}:
sum {d in Demands} tran[s,d] <= Available[s];
```

Similarly, the total amount transported **to** a demand **cannot be less than** the requirement at that demand. This constraint is for each demand, and the summation is now over all supplies, as material can be transported to a specific demand from all supplies.

```glp
s.t. Requirement_at_Demand_Points {d in Demands}:
sum {s in Supplies} tran[s,d] >= Required[d];
```

The **objective** is to minimize the **total cost**. Each transportation amount must be multiplied by the unit cost for that particular connection, and then summed over all connections between supplies and demands.

```glp
minimize Total_Costs:
sum {s in Supplies, d in Demands} tran[s,d] * Cost[s,d];
```

At this point, let's consider whether the problem even has a solution. Two quantities are of special interest: the **total amount of available supply**, which we'll denote as $S$, and the **total amount of required demand**, which we'll denote as $D$. There are three possible scenarios:

  * If $S < D$, the problem is **infeasible**, as there is simply not enough supply available to meet all demands.
  * If $S = D$, the problem is **feasible**, but all supply must be used, and each demand must receive exactly the required amount—no more.
  * If $S > D$, the problem is **feasible**. There can (and will) be leftover material at the supplies, or excess deliveries at the demands, or both.

Without actually solving the model, we can check the problem data to ensure it's feasible. This check statement is ideally placed after the parameters but before the variable and constraint definitions. This check is useful because it provides a dedicated error message referring to the `check` statement if a problem is infeasible.

```glp
check sum {s in Supplies} Available[s] >= sum {d in Demands} Required[d];
```

Note that in our current model formulation, we allow both leftover materials at supplies (via the $\le$ constraint) and excess deliveries at demands (via the $\ge$ constraint). If these were not allowed, the corresponding two constraints would have to be specified as equations ($\text{=}$) instead. It's worth pointing out that if the transport costs are positive, there's no benefit to transporting more than the demand requires, so the optimization process will eliminate that case anyway.

In some formulations of the transportation problem, $S = D$ is an assumption. Note that in a problem where $S > D$, we can introduce a **dummy demand** with a requirement of $S - D$ and zero transportation costs from all supplies. The purpose of this dummy demand is to receive all the leftover amounts. Therefore, this new problem is equivalent to the original one but has equal total supplies and demands. In conclusion, the $S > D$ case is essentially no more general than the $S = D$ case.

The model description for Problem 21, the transportation problem, is now complete. The model section can be enhanced with `printf` statements to display the result once it's found. We'll only show transportation amounts that are greater than zero. The full model section is as follows:

```glp
set Supplies;
set Demands;
param Available {s in Supplies}, >=0;
param Required {d in Demands}, >=0;
param Cost {s in Supplies, D in Demands}, >=0;
check sum {s in Supplies} Available[s] >= sum {d in Demands} Required[d];
var tran {s in Supplies, D in Demands}, >=0;
s.t. Availability_at_Supply_Points {s in Supplies}:
sum {d in Demands} tran[s,d] <= Available[s];
s.t. Requirement_at_Demand_Points {d in Demands}:
sum {s in Supplies} tran[s,d] >= Required[d];
minimize Total_Costs:
sum {s in Supplies, d in Demands} tran[s,d] * Cost[s,d];
solve;
printf "Optimal cost: %g.\n", Total_Costs;
for {s in Supplies, d in Demands: tran[s,d] > 0}
{
printf "From %s to %s, transport %g amount for %g (unit cost: %g).\n",
s, d, tran[s,d], tran[s,d] * Cost[s,d], Cost[s,d];
}
end;
```

For completeness, we also show the **data section** corresponding to **Problem 22**.

```glp
data;
set Supplies := S1 S2 S3 S4;
set Demands := D1 D2 D3 D4 D5 D6;
param Available :=
S1 100
S2 250
S3 190
S4 210
;
param Required :=
D1 120
D2 140
D3 170
D4 90
D5 110
D6 120
;
param Cost:
D1 D2 D3 D4 D5 D6 :=
S1
5 10
3
9
5 12
S2
1
2
6
1
2
6
S3
6
5
1
6
4
8
S4
9 10
6
8
9
7
;
end;
```

Solving the problem with `glpsol` yields the following result:

```
Optimal cost: 2700.
From S1 to D1, transport 10 amount for 50 (unit cost: 5).
From S1 to D5, transport 90 amount for 450 (unit cost: 5).
From S2 to D1, transport 110 amount for 110 (unit cost: 1).
From S2 to D2, transport 140 amount for 280 (unit cost: 2).
From S3 to D3, transport 170 amount for 170 (unit cost: 1).
From S3 to D5, transport 20 amount for 80 (unit cost: 4).
From S4 to D4, transport 90 amount for 720 (unit cost: 8).
From S4 to D6, transport 120 amount for 840 (unit cost: 7).
```

The results of the transportation problem can be fitted back into the original data table by substituting the unit costs with the decided transportation amounts. Zero amounts can be omitted entirely.

| | **D1** | **D2** | **D3** | **D4** | **D5** | **D6** | **Available** |
|:---|:---:|:---:|:---:|:---:|:---:|:---:|:---:|
| **S1** | 10 | | | | 90 | | 100 |
| **S2** | 110 | 140 | | | | | 250 |
| **S3** | | | 170 | | 20 | | 190 |
| **S4** | | | | 90 | | 120 | 210 |
| **Required** | 120 | 140 | 170 | 90 | 110 | 120 | |

This representation better clarifies the elements of the model. The **decisions** are represented by the inner cells, while the **constraints** are represented by the rightmost column and the bottom row. Each supply constraint dictates that the sum in that row must be at most the number on the right. Each demand constraint dictates that the sum in that column must be at least the number at the bottom. Since the total supply and total demand are equal in this example, all constraints can only hold true as an **equation** ($\text{=}$). This is exactly the case throughout the table.

Examining the results, we can see that the optimal solution attempts to use the **cheapest unit costs** whenever possible, but not always. For instance, the transport from **S4 to D4** is chosen despite not being the absolute cheapest method, either from supply S4 or to demand D4. However, it proves to be a good choice because the remaining transportation can then be done more cheaply. Note that based on this single run of the model, we cannot be certain that this is the only optimal solution.

There are many other examples of the transportation problem publicly available; see, for example, [16].

-----

### 6.2 Connections as an Index Set

Based on the complete solution presented in Section 6.1, we will now slightly enhance the implementation. As mentioned previously, in GNU MathProg, we can introduce additional parameters and sets to simplify the model formulation. These can either be defined on the spot, read from a separate data section outside the model, or allow both as a default value.

Notice that the indexing expression `s in Supplies, d in Demands` appears in four different contexts:

  * In the `Cost` parameter, as it is defined for all such pairs.
  * In the `tran` variable, as it is defined for all such pairs.
  * In the objective function, as it is a sum over all such pairs.
  * In the post-processing work, because transport amounts are printed for all such pairs. (In this case, there is a filter that only allows nonzero amounts to be reported.)

It would be a serious error to make a mistake in this indexing—for example, by switching the order of `Supplies` and `Demands`, which would result in a modeling error. To avoid such errors and slightly reduce redundancy in the model formulation, we can introduce a two-dimensional set of these pairs to be used later. Each supply and each demand are considered to be part of a **connection**. Thus, the transportation problem involves deciding on transportation amounts for each connection. The set `Connections` can be introduced as follows:

```glp
set Connections := setof {s in Supplies, d in Demands} (s,d);
```

We are using a new GNU MathProg operator here: `setof`. This is a general method for defining sets based on data previously defined in the model section. The `setof` operator is followed by an indexing expression, then by a simple expression. The resulting set is formed by evaluating the final expression for all possible indices in the indexing expression. It's similar to `sum`, but instead of adding elements up, it forms a set of them. Note that the indexing expression in `setof` can be filtered, which gives us fine control over the set being defined. Since the result is a set, duplicates are removed, and the result can also be empty if everything is filtered out; however, neither of these is the case here.

In fact, this usage of `setof` is quite simple: it just collects all possible pairs formed by the two sets. The set `Connections` is a **Cartesian product** of the sets `Supplies` and `Demands`. There is another built-in operator called `cross` for the Cartesian product of two sets, which allows for a simpler definition of the set `Connections` as follows. Either definition can be used, as they are equivalent.

```glp
set Connections := Supplies cross Demands;
```

The dimension of the sets `Supplies` and `Demands` is 1 because they contain simple elements, whereas the dimension of `Connections` is 2 because it contains pairs (or 2-tuples). In GNU MathProg, a set can have as many as 20 dimensions. If a set contains $n$-tuples, then its dimension is $n$. Sets with different dimensions **cannot be mixed** together with set operations like `union`, `inter`, or `diff`. Even a one-dimensional empty set is considered different from a two-dimensional empty set.

The dimension of a set determines how it can be used in indexing expressions. One-dimensional sets are indexed by a single introduced symbol, like `s in Supplies` or `d in Demands`. However, two- (and higher-) dimensional sets are indexed by a tuple element, like `(s,d) in Connections`. In general, an indexing expression may contain many sets with different dimensions, each one introducing one or more new index symbols that can be referenced.

In short, everywhere we see `s in Supplies, d in Demands` in an indexing expression, we can now write `(s,d) in Connections`, as shown in the complete model below.

```glp
set Supplies;
set Demands;
param Available {s in Supplies}, >=0;
param Required {d in Demands}, >=0;
set Connections := Supplies cross Demands;
param Cost {(s,d) in Connections}, >=0;
check sum {s in Supplies} Available[s] >= sum {d in Demands} Required[d];
var tran {(s,d) in Connections}, >=0;
s.t. Availability_at_Supply_Points {s in Supplies}:
sum {d in Demands} tran[s,d] <= Available[s];
s.t. Requirement_at_Demand_Points {d in Demands}:
sum {s in Supplies} tran[s,d] >= Required[d];
minimize Total_Costs:
sum {(s,d) in Connections} tran[s,d] * Cost[s,d];
solve;
printf "Optimal cost: %g.\n", Total_Costs;
for {(s,d) in Connections: tran[s,d] > 0}
{
printf "From %s to %s, transport %g amount for %g (unit cost: %g).\n",
s, d, tran[s,d], tran[s,d] * Cost[s,d], Cost[s,d];
}
end;
```

The resulting new model file is **equivalent** to the original one; therefore, solving the same data file describing **Problem 22** should yield the exact same result.

To illustrate how explicitly introducing an index set like `Connections` in the model can be beneficial, consider the following new problem...

 

 