

## Problem 23.

Solve **Problem 22**, the original example transportation problem, with one modification: only those connections are allowed for transportation whose unit costs are **no greater than 7**.

We introduce a parameter to denote the unit cost limit.

```
param Max_Unit_Cost, default 7;
```

Note that by providing a default value of **7** instead of setting the parameter equal to **7**, we allow the possibility to **alter** `Max_Unit_Cost` by providing a value in the data section, if we ever want to choose a different limit.

One possible solution is to express a new constraint that explicitly finds each prohibited connection and sets the transported amount there to zero, effectively excluding the connection from the model.

```
s.t. Connections_Prohibited
{s in Supplies, d in Demands: Cost[s,d] > Max_Unit_Cost}: tran[s,d] = 0;
```

However, in this case, we use many variables in the model just to fix them at zero. It's possible **not to include** those variables in the model formulation at all, and this can be done by introducing a **filter** in the `setof` expression defining the **`Connections`** set.

```
set Connections :=
setof {s in Supplies, d in Demands: Cost[s,d] <= Max_Unit_Cost} (s,d);
```

With this filter, we only include those connections in the **`Connections`** set that are allowed. Therefore, without modifying other parts of the model, the exclusion is implemented—the indexing expressions `(s,d)` in `Connections` just iterate over a **smaller set** in the background.

Note that **care must be taken** with this method, because now the following constraint would cause an **out-of-domain error**:

```
s.t. Availability_at_Supply_Points {s in Supplies}:
sum {d in Demands} tran[s,d] <= Available[s];
```

The problem is that `tran[s,d]` is iterated over **all pairs** of `s` in **`Supplies`** and `d` in **`Demands`**, but the variable is simply **not defined** for all such pairs now. This is in strong contrast with the first approach where they **are defined**, but explicitly set to zero. We must now ensure that the sum only considers **allowed connections**, which can be done as follows:

```
s.t. Availability_at_Supply_Points {s in Supplies}:
sum {(s,d) in Connections} tran[s,d] <= Available[s];
```

In this case, the role of $s$ and $d$ are different in the sum operator. Despite being used as an index, $s$ is a **constant value**. But $d$ is introduced **inside** the indexing expression, so it can be freely chosen by the sum. The meaning of the indexing expression is that all $(s,d)$ pairs are selected for which $s$ is a given value. This effectively sums over all demands that are allowed to be connected to the particular $s$, and the constraint works as desired.

The point is that an $n$-tuple index in an indexing expression can have **constant coordinates** as long as it contains **at least one new, free symbol** for a coordinate. In the GNU MathProg language documentation, an index symbol that is introduced by an indexing expression is called a **dummy index**. Dummy indices are **freely selected** by the indexing expression in all possible ways and can be used as constants afterward in the expression. Here, $s$ is a dummy index from the indexing of the constraint, whereas $d$ is a dummy index from the indexing expression of the sum operator, but **both** can be referred to in the operand of the sum, which is `tran[s,d]` now.

The model contains another constraint for the demands; this must also be updated similarly, by replacing `s in Supplies` with `(s,d) in Connections`, and our model section for the new problem is ready.

Solving it with the original problem data reports an optimal solution of **2790**, slightly worse than the original solution of **2700**. This isn't surprising, as the original solution used a unit cost of **8**. By excluding it, it's theoretically possible to obtain the same objective another way, but that's not the case here. The moral of the story is that, contrary to first thought, excluding connections that are too expensive can be a **disadvantage** in the transportation problem.

Note that although the transportation problem has feasible (and optimal) solutions if the total supplies are **no less** than the total demands, this is **no longer guaranteed** if certain connections are prohibited.

-----

## 6.3. Increasing Unit Costs

So far, a **linear transportation cost** was assumed at each connection. The amount is simply multiplied by a constant to obtain the cost. The relationship between the total amount transported and the total cost incurred can be schematically represented as in Figure 2. The red line represents the calculated total costs, but the area above that curve can be regarded as "feasible" too.  The logic behind this is that we're allowed to pay more than needed; it just doesn't make sense.

The term **proportional cost** is also widely used. Proportional cost means a cost or its component for which the ratio of total amounts and costs is a **parameter constant**.

In practice, the total cost or effort to be paid for some resource is **not always proportional** to the amount of resource actually used. A few common examples are shown in this and the following sections, which can be modeled as a **Linear Program (LP)** or at least as a **Mixed-Integer Linear Program (MILP)** model.

The first example is when the unit cost is a constant, but after some threshold amount is reached, it **increases** to a higher constant value. This is common in practice, and the phenomenon is called the **law of diminishing returns**. This means that if we spend an additional unit for costs, we get **less and less return**. This is equivalent to having a unit price that **increases** with the total amount already obtained.

 