

## Problem 32.

Solve **Problem 21**, the transportation problem extended by introducing a middle level of so-called **centers**.

Material doesn't flow directly from the **supply** to the **demand** nodes. Instead, material first goes from supply nodes to center nodes and then from center nodes to demand nodes. Connections between either supplies and centers, or centers and demands, have their own transportation costs, as is standard. Moreover, centers are not necessarily used in transportation, but if a center is utilized, an **establishment cost** must be paid first if any transportation is routed through that center. Establishment costs are one-time fees and are given for each center.

As previously mentioned, the original transportation problem can be represented by a graph with two types of nodes: supplies and demands (see Figure 1 in Section 6.1). In contrast, the scheme of the new transportation problem can be seen in Figure 7. Connections from supplies to centers are referred to as **A-type**, while connections from centers to demands are referred to as **B-type**, as the figure shows.

Note that in general, transportation could occur over any network. However, if **cycles** are present, care must be taken to correctly interpret material flow through these cycles. Throughout this chapter, there are no cycles; material only flows in one direction.

> **Figure 7:** Graph representing the transportation problem with center nodes included.

-----

## Problem 33.

Solve **Problem 21**, the general transportation problem with centers, using the following problem data. There are four supplies, named **S1 to S4**, two centers, **C1 and C2**, and six demands, named **D1 to D6**. Transportation costs, available amounts for supplies, and required amounts for demands are summarized in the following table:

| From Supply to Center | C1 | C2 | Available Amounts |
| :---: | :---: | :---: | :---: |
| S1 | 5 | 10 | 100 |
| S2 | 10 | 2 | 250 |
| S3 | 3 | 7 | 190 |
| S4 | 10 | 4 | 210 |
| **From Center to Demand** | **D1** | **D2** | **D3** | **D4** | **D5** | **D6** | **Required Amounts** |
| C1 | 10 | 3 | 9 | 8 | 1 | 6 | - |
| C2 | 2 | 7 | 3 | 2 | 7 | 8 | - |
| Required Amounts | 120 | 140 | 170 | 90 | 110 | 120 | **Total: 750** |

Two scenarios must be evaluated:

  * **In the first, "small" establishment cost scenario,** using C1 and C2 requires a fixed cost of **1,200** and **1,400**, respectively.
  * **In the second, "large" establishment cost scenario,** fixed costs are multiplied by $10$ (e.g., **12,000** and **14,000**, respectively).

-----

## 6.7. ADDING A MIDDLE LEVEL: TRANSPORTATION PROBLEM

Before starting the model implementation, the **data section** describing Problem 33 can be implemented as follows. The only difference between the two scenarios is the value of the `EstablishCost` parameter.

```
data;
set Supplies := S1 S2 S3 S4;
set Centers := C1 C2;
set Demands := D1 D2 D3 D4 D5 D6;
param Available :=
S1 100
S2 250
S3 190
S4 210
;
param Required :=
D1 120
D2 140
D3 170
D4 90
D5 110
D6 120
;
param CostA:
C1 C2 :=
S1
5 10
S2 10
2
S3
3
7
S4 10
4
;
param CostB:
D1 D2
C1 10
3
C2
2
7
;

D3
9
3

D4
8
2

D5
1
7

D6 :=
6
8

param EstablishCost :=
C1 1200
C2 1400
;
```

Sets `Supplies` and `Demands`, and parameters `Available` and `Required` have the same meaning as before. However, instead of a single parameter for transportation costs, two parameters, named **`CostA` and `CostB`**, are introduced for **A-type** (supply-to-center) and **B-type** (center-to-demand) connections, respectively. Finally, `EstablishCost` denotes the fixed cost of using a center node.

The corresponding definitions in the model section are the following. Note that the sets of all A-type and B-type connections are also defined.

```
set Supplies;
set Centers;
set Demands;
param Available {s in Supplies}, >=0;
param Required {d in Demands}, >=0;
set ConnectionsA := Supplies cross Centers;
set ConnectionsB := Centers cross Demands;
param CostA {(s,c) in ConnectionsA}, >=0;
param CostB {(c,d) in ConnectionsB}, >=0;
param EstablishCost {c in Centers}, >=0;
```

We can still check the **feasibility** of the problem by asserting that the total available amounts are greater than or equal to the total required amounts.

```
check sum {s in Supplies} Available[s] >= sum {d in Demands} Required[d];
```

Now that the data are available in the model section, let's figure out what the **decision variables** in the model should be. At first glance, the problem seems like two independent transportation sub-problems: one from supplies to centers, and one from centers to demands. However, we cannot solve these two transportation stages separately because the amounts at the center nodes are not fixed; these are part of the decision.

However, we **can** solve the two transportation sub-problems in a \*\* single model\*\*. The necessary decision variables for both transportation problems are simultaneously defined in the model: from supplies to centers, and from centers to demands. The only difference is that the amount of materials delivered to and sent from the centers are not fixed values in the sub-problems, but **variable quantities**. Moreover, the amount delivered **to** and **from** a center node must be equal. This is where the two sub-problems are connected, and it can be easily established by constraints.

Because of these considerations, variables `tranA` and `tranB` are introduced to denote transportation amounts for A-type and B-type connections (e.g., from supplies to centers and from centers to demands). In fact, these decisions are sufficient to determine everything about the resulting transportation system; however, **additional variables** are required. Variable `atCenter` denotes the amount of material going through each center node, which is exactly the amount going in and going out. This is more of an **auxiliary variable**, as it's not strictly required but makes implementation easier. However, the **binary variable** `useCenter`, denoting whether a center is used at all ($=1$) or not ($=0$), **is required** in order to implement the **fixed establishment costs** associated with center nodes.

```
var tranA {(s,c) in ConnectionsA}, >=0;
var tranB {(c,d) in ConnectionsB}, >=0;
var atCenter {c in Centers}, >=0;
var useCenter {c in Centers}, binary;
```

Four constraints ensure the consistency of material flow through the entire network. The following rules are expressed in order:

1.  **Total transportation from supply nodes** shall not exceed the available amount.
2.  **Total transportation to center nodes** is equal to the `atCenter` value of that center node.
3.  **Total transportation from center nodes** is equal to the `atCenter` value of that center node.
4.  **Total transportation to demand nodes** shall be at least the required amount.

<!-- end list -->

```
s.t. Availability_at_Supply_Points {s in Supplies}:
sum {c in Centers} tranA[s,c] <= Available[s];
s.t. Total_To_Center {c in Centers}:
atCenter[c] = sum {s in Supplies} tranA[s,c];
s.t. Total_From_Center {c in Centers}:
atCenter[c] = sum {d in Demands} tranB[c,d];
s.t. Requirement_at_Demand_Points {d in Demands}:
sum {c in Centers} tranB[c,d] >= Required[d];
```

Note that since we express `atCenter` in two different ways (in `Total_To_Center` and `Total_From_Center`), the two expressions that are equal to `atCenter` are made equal to each other.

A fifth constraint must be added to ensure that a center node can only receive or send materials if it is established. The total available amount is denoted by $\mathbf{M}$, which serves as the coefficient in the required **Big-M constraint**.

```
param M := sum {s in Supplies} Available[s];
s.t. Zero_at_Center_if_Not_Established {c in Centers}:
atCenter[c] <= M * useCenter[c];
```

The **objective function** is the total of all costs, which has three components: A-type connection costs, B-type connection costs, and the establishment costs of center nodes.

```
minimize Total_Costs:
sum {(s,c) in ConnectionsA} tranA[s,c] * CostA[s,c] +
sum {(c,d) in ConnectionsB} tranB[c,d] * CostB[c,d] +
sum {c in Centers} useCenter[c] * EstablishCost[c];
```

We can include `printf` statements after the `solve` statement, as usual, to show the details of the optimal solution found. Our model section is ready.

```
set Supplies;
set Centers;
set Demands;
param Available {s in Supplies}, >=0;
param Required {d in Demands}, >=0;
set ConnectionsA := Supplies cross Centers;
set ConnectionsB := Centers cross Demands;
param CostA {(s,c) in ConnectionsA}, >=0;
param CostB {(c,d) in ConnectionsB}, >=0;
param EstablishCost {c in Centers}, >=0;
check sum {s in Supplies} Available[s] >= sum {d in Demands} Required[d];
var tranA {(s,c) in ConnectionsA}, >=0;
var tranB {(c,d) in ConnectionsB}, >=0;
var atCenter {c in Centers}, >=0;
var useCenter {c in Centers}, binary;
s.t. Availability_at_Supply_Points {s in Supplies}:
sum {c in Centers} tranA[s,c] <= Available[s];
s.t. Total_To_Center {c in Centers}:
atCenter[c] = sum {s in Supplies} tranA[s,c];
s.t. Total_From_Center {c in Centers}:
atCenter[c] = sum {d in Demands} tranB[c,d];
s.t. Requirement_at_Demand_Points {d in Demands}:
sum {c in Centers} tranB[c,d] >= Required[d];
param M := sum {s in Supplies} Available[s];
s.t. Zero_at_Center_if_Not_Established {c in Centers}:
atCenter[c] <= M * useCenter[c];
minimize Total_Costs:
sum {(s,c) in ConnectionsA} tranA[s,c] * CostA[s,c] +
sum {(c,d) in ConnectionsB} tranB[c,d] * CostB[c,d] +
sum {c in Centers} useCenter[c] * EstablishCost[c];
solve;
printf "Optimal cost: %g.\n", Total_Costs;
for {c in Centers: useCenter[c]}
{
printf "Establishing center %s for %g.\n", c, EstablishCost[c];
}
for {(s,c) in ConnectionsA: tranA[s,c] > 0}
{
printf "A: From %s to %s, transport %g amount for %g (unit cost: %g).\n",
s, c, tranA[s,c], tranA[s,c] * CostA[s,c], CostA[s,c];
}
for {(c,d) in ConnectionsB: tranB[c,d] > 0}
{
printf "B: From %s to %s, transport %g amount for %g (unit cost: %g).\n",
c, d, tranB[c,d], tranB[c,d] * CostB[c,d], CostB[c,d];
}
end;
```

Now we can use the solver to find the optimal decisions for both scenarios in Problem 33. Recall that the **small scenario** assumes fixed costs of $1,200$ and $1,400$ for establishing C1 and C2, while the **large scenario** assumes $12,000$ and $14,000$.

The results of the **small scenario** are the following:

> Optimal cost: **$7,350$**.
>
> Establishing center C1 for $1,200$.
> Establishing center C2 for $1,400$.
>
> A: From S1 to C1, transport $100$ amount for $500$ (unit cost: $5$).
> A: From S2 to C2, transport $250$ amount for $500$ (unit cost: $2$).
> A: From S3 to C1, transport $190$ amount for $570$ (unit cost: $3$).
> A: From S4 to C2, transport $210$ amount for $840$ (unit cost: $4$).
>
> B: From C1 to D2, transport $140$ amount for $420$ (unit cost: $3$).
> B: From C1 to D5, transport $110$ amount for $110$ (unit cost: $1$).
> B: From C1 to D6, transport $40$ amount for $240$ (unit cost: $6$).
> B: From C2 to D1, transport $120$ amount for $240$ (unit cost: $2$).
> B: From C2 to D3, transport $170$ amount for $510$ (unit cost: $3$).
> B: From C2 to D4, transport $90$ amount for $180$ (unit cost: $2$).
> B: From C2 to D6, transport $80$ amount for $640$ (unit cost: $8$).

The results of the **large scenario** are the following:

> Optimal cost: **$21,310$**.
>
> Establishing center C2 for $14,000$.
>
> A: From S1 to C2, transport $100$ amount for $1,000$ (unit cost: $10$).
> A: From S2 to C2, transport $250$ amount for $500$ (unit cost: $2$).
> A: From S3 to C2, transport $190$ amount for $1,330$ (unit cost: $7$).
> A: From S4 to C2, transport $210$ amount for $840$ (unit cost: $4$).
>
> B: From C2 to D1, transport $120$ amount for $240$ (unit cost: $2$).
> B: From C2 to D2, transport $140$ amount for $980$ (unit cost: $7$).
> B: From C2 to D3, transport $170$ amount for $510$ (unit cost: $3$).
> B: From C2 to D4, transport $90$ amount for $180$ (unit cost: $2$).
> B: From C2 to D5, transport $110$ amount for $770$ (unit cost: $7$).
> B: From C2 to D6, transport $120$ amount for $960$ (unit cost: $8$).

As we can see, the optimal solution for the small scenario uses **both** center nodes, with an almost equal distribution of materials. Therefore, establishing both centers for a total of $2,600$ is advantageous. There is no need to deliver to both center nodes from the same supply, and there is only a single demand, D6, where delivery is made from both center nodes. It seems like the establishment costs are paid, and then the cheapest possible routes are used from supplies to demands.

In contrast, the establishment costs are **too high** in the large scenario, so establishing both centers is not beneficial. However, we still need at least one center node for the network, and the optimal solution chooses **C2** with a fixed cost of $14,000$. Assuming this decision, transportation is straightforward: every supply is transported to C2 and then from C2 to the demands. Note that C2 is more expensive to establish than C1 by $2,000$, but choosing C2 seems to be justified by the larger transportation costs across C1.

-----

## 6.8. TRANSPORTATION PROBLEM – SUMMARY

The basic case of the transportation problem was first presented, which involves a set of supply and demand nodes and transportation costs between them. The implementation was later improved by introducing index sets and some additional features of GNU MathProg.

The transportation problem results in an **LP (Linear Programming) model**, and transportation costs for each connection are linear (e.g., they can be described by a single cost coefficient, which, when multiplied by the transported amount, gives the total cost). Four cases of more elaborate cost functions, example problems, and their implementations were also presented:

  * **Increasing Unit Costs:** Two factors and a threshold describe the situation, but we still use an **LP** model.
  * **Economy of Scale:** Two factors and a threshold describe the function again, but the cost above the threshold is now lower. **Binary decision variables** are required, making it a **MILP (Mixed-Integer Linear Programming)** model.
  * **Fixed Costs:** A fixed cost is paid once instead of a proportional cost describing the cost function. A **binary variable** is used; the model is **MILP**.
  * **Linear Penalties:** Flexible demands were assumed, and any difference, either positive or negative, was penalized by a linear factor. This results in an **LP** model.

Finally, the transportation problem was extended by **center nodes**, which divides the entire problem into two related sub-problems, and a fixed cost decision problem is also involved.

 